The Sahil and Daniel Co-op Resume Guide

Introduction
This guide was written by two Waterloo Engineering undergrads, Daniel Puratich (EE ‘26) and Sahil
Kale (Tron ‘25). We sought to write a resume guide that conveyed our way of writing resumes one tailored for jobs within the software and hardware engineering sectors with specific tips and
tricks that we found hard to find elsewhere.
A checklist version of the guide that covers the most impactful and common critiques is available
here: Appendix - Resume Review Pre-screen.

About Us
Sahil interned at Tesla, Skydio, and BETA Technologies, focusing on real-time embedded software
for safety-critical control systems.
Daniel interned at Tesla, Anduril Industries, and Pure Watercraft, focusing on electrical engineering
and PC board design.

Target Audience
Our target demographic is engineering undergraduates looking for internships in the US and
Canada. While we may include some Waterloo-specific information here, the general advice will
apply to engineering undergraduates seeking co-op roles in any engineering discipline.
We both go to the University of Waterloo, which requires all engineering students to do six
co-op/internship terms as a requirement of their undergraduate program. This is an excellent way
for students to gain work experience before graduating and an opportunity to try various types of
work within their field.

Suggestions/Commentary/Notes and Resume Drop
If you would like to suggest something for us to look into—be it a section you think we should add
or an improvement we should make—or just want to say hi and drop a kind note (we appreciate all
of them ), feel free to connect with us at the linked form below.

We are also looking to make our own resume/portfolio bank at the end of this document. If you’d
like yours to be featured (or want to show off a cool before/after), feel free to toss it at the form
below as well.
Form link to connect with us!

The Big Idea
Clarify the Requirements
When a new project starts, the first step is usually the same, regardless of the engineering
discipline - clarify the requirements. The same applies to a resume, no matter the discipline,
types of jobs you’re applying to, etc. - each resume should be written with a goal in mind, and its
content should point back to this goal. The ultimate goal of a resume is to land you an interview.
Further, the goal of the interview is to land a job, but that’s an entirely separate game and guide
(and one you can read here!
The Sahil and Daniel Co-op Process Guide ).
To help you land an interview, it helps to develop an objective statement that you want to impart
to a reader of your resume. Having one is crucial as it gives you something to express your
experiences thematically and helps you decide what belongs on your resume and what doesn’t.
Your resume is one of the most critical documents in your adult life, and consequently, it should
demand your best effort when constructing it.


Resume Philosophy
There is no glory or value in how much time your resume took to create or how hard it is to edit.
For this reason, We highly recommend using the most straightforward software or the software
you are most familiar with to create your resume. If you aren’t sure, Google Docs or Microsoft
Word are easy starting places. Sahil is biased toward Google Docs, as sharing a resume as a link is
easy (see Templates).
Returning to the “big idea” of the goal of a resume, which is to get you the interview, do not spend
a significant amount of time optimizing your resume, especially when you lack relevant
experience in the field of your choice. Your time is far better spent getting technical experience
to put onto your resume than optimizing the experiences you have right now.
We recommend keeping your resume in a state where it can be used to apply for a job or shared
at any given time. This approach minimizes the up-front time spent on the resume, enabling you
to apply more effectively and quickly.

Tailoring
Keeping your resume tailored to the specific job type you are aiming for is highly recommended. If
your interests span multiple industries/types of work, it is advisable to maintain different resume
copies with different content tailored to those specific types of jobs. Doing so allows you to
show off your depth of knowledge in a specific area while presenting the content most relevant to
a hiring manager.
However, we recommend only tailoring to specific industries and job types (i.e. Electrical,
Mechanical, Firmware) rather than individual company roles, as it helps demonstrate technical
depth in a particular area and, therefore, is more likely to get you an interview for most
engineering intern roles.

Appearance
The look of a resume is somewhat trivial, provided you can find a suitable template online or
customize it to fit your requirements well. The marks of a suitable resume format in the
engineering sector, in our opinion, are as follows:
Easy to find relevant information and flow from start to finish
Contains links and contact information near the top, alongside your name
​Does not feature fancy graphics or is overly illustrative
​Maintains a minimum of size 10 font (though ~12 is recommended for body text)
Does not exceed 1 page for every ten years of professional experience you have
For this reason, many engineering resumes maintain a similar format. They look slightly dull, but
they possess the relevant information available at a glance, which is the most critical factor for a
resume’s appearance.

Styling / Layout
Styling and picking a resume layout is much less involved than people think. For most engineering
resumes, you’ll notice that most online resources converge into a classic format that can be
described as somewhat bland but informative - as though it belongs in a research paper. If you’re
looking for examples, go on LinkedIn for resumes from your program. The reasoning for this
blandness is rooted in the fact that managers and engineers care about your technical experience
and abilities, not your ability to choose a font. We recommend adapting a template to your needs
rather than making your own, especially when starting.

One versus Two-Column Resumes
Sahil’s words on this are that roughly ½ the people you meet will tell you to switch from a
2-column resume to a 1-column resume, but just about no one will say the opposite. There are
many debates about which is better; Sahil’s take is to be pragmatic and take the one that the vast
majority will find acceptable (one column). Beware that 2 column resumes will likely cause
people to miss information depending on how they read it. Daniel would argue against the
two-column resume because they’re generally considered poor for automated resume readers.

Bolding
Bolding is a little like playing with fire, as you can inadvertently force what people read on a
document. Later in this guide, we will discuss the resume heatmap technique that can help
determine how this impacts your resume. Beware that if you bold the lines in a resume, be ready
for people to refrain from reading any non-bolded words. (See what we did there!)
Using bolding for headings is permissible for styling. We recommend against bolding words or
phrases in the body text. Bolding keywords in the middle of sentences/points can make a piece far
less readable and, in our opinion, should be avoided.

All Caps
We advise against using all caps in nearly all instances. All caps make sentences and headings
harder to read and also seem overly aggressive. Some fonts people like for headings appear to be
all caps, we would advise against this.

Links
Including links is excellent in a resume, though it is essential to be careful about the formatting.
We both include links on key terms but use the formatting to keep them discrete. This means
adding in the hyperlink, but changing the formatting back to match this text around it like this. This
allows curious readers to click on an unknown term to get more information ruining the easy to
read formatting that most are seeking as they skim your resume.
We recommend including a link for anything you expect your target audience may need to be
more familiar with. For example, refrain from linking C++ when applying to a software position,
though a link to organizations such as Waterloo Aerial Robotics Group would be reasonable if
mentioned on the resume.
It’s worth noting that it’s somewhat uncommon (though not rare, hence why it is recommended to
include links still) for people to click on links for projects and other information—a portfolio is a
better method to include more information and show off what you’ve done.

Font Size
Of course, font size changes based on the font used; however, a font size of 10 should be a hard
minimum. For body text, sizes 10 to 12 should be employed. Daniel has heard from recruiters that
resumes with less than size ten get immediately skipped. Sahil’s graphics design teacher would fail
someone if they made a printed design featuring a font size of less than 12.
Consistency is important. If you use multiple headings, they should use the same font size. If
multiple sections contain body text, all body text should be the same font size.
Some fonts have varying spacing between the letters. We recommend using fonts that work well
together when using different fonts for headings and body text.

Page Count
We recommend one page for every ten years of relevant technical experience. For the vast
majority of undergraduates, this is likely one page. Note that we do not count the addition of a
separate add-along portfolio to be included in the resume page count, even though they may
share the same physical document.
If you are going for more than one page on your resume, we recommend filling at least half of
your last page with resume content. If you can’t write enough valuable content to meet this, then
try making your resume one page shorter.

Colour
Generally, a grayscale colour theme is recommended. That means black and grey text with a solid
white background. It’s boring and simple, but also non-controversial and functional. If you are an
artsy person comfortable in your colour capabilities then hints of soft peaceful colors have been
seen to give good results. We recommend refraining from using red entirely on a resume as it can
come across as aggressive.

File Name
When you export your resume as a PDF for submission, use a professional resume name. Your
name and then “resume” are plenty. For example, Daniel names his resume PDF file as
“Daniel_Puratich_Resume,” and Sahil uses “Sahil-Kale-Resume.”
Do not include a version number, a date, or any other personal delimiter in the file name.
Including these is simply unnecessary, distracting, and unprofessional. Your resume file name is
one of the first pieces of you a potential employer will see. Due to the importance of anchoring
bias and the halo effect you should not undervalue your opening.

File Size
Most applications do not have a limit to file size so don’t stress about it too much, however, we
recommend your resume file (all in, including in-file portfolio) does not exceed 10 MB to ensure it
doesn’t take excessively long to open. Compressing software does exist to help reduce the size of
images which is usually the culprit for large resume files.
Some companies' applications do limit resume file size in which case a tailored resume should be
used to compress images just enough to fit under the limit. Adobe offers a PDF compressing
feature for free which offers varying degrees of compression. Additionally, removing an in-line
portfolio may be optimal if very small files are required.

Writing a STAR Bullet Point
Writing bullet points for a resume is a little weird - it’s English, but written in a way that would
make most English teachers question how you passed grade six. The preferred method for writing
bullet points is the ‘STAR’ method’, which refers to ‘Situation, Task, Action, Result’. Each bullet
point should have these four elements to deliver context while explaining what occurred.
The key here is to be highly concrete in your resume points. If you leave something vague or
abstract, you leave the door open for a reader to assume the worst.

Example Bullet Points
Here are some examples of good bullet points (with ChatGPT’s assistance):
●​ Achieved a 95% accuracy rate in detecting obstacles for novel underwater robotic
platforms using SLAM, enhancing the robot's safety and navigation capabilities.
●​ Developed and implemented model predictive control algorithms using Python and ROS,
improving mechatronic actuator positioning accuracy by 25%.
●​ Designed and tested a real-time obstacle detection system using OpenCV and
TensorFlow, achieving a 95% accuracy rate in identifying and avoiding obstacles during
autonomous navigation.
●​ Conducted finite element analysis (FEA) simulations using ANSYS, optimizing the design
of a critical machine component, increasing its strength by 35% while reducing weight by
18%.
●​ Collaborated with a cross-functional team of industrial designers and manufacturing
engineers to develop a new product line using SolidWorks, reducing the product
development cycle by 20% and achieving a 15% cost savings in production.
●​ Led the design and testing of a power electronics module for a solar inverter system,
achieving a 98% energy conversion efficiency and enabling a 20% increase in renewable
energy utilization.
Here are some examples of poor resumes from us. Notice how these resume points fail to convey
what the individual has done concretely and concisely. Further, some of these use abstract,
borderline meaningless, descriptors that fail to convey impact directly.
Helped with electrical tasks and troubleshooting in the company
Assisted in some mechanical tasks and contributed to the development of a product
Gained deep experience in using advanced software tools for engineering tasks
Performed complicated hardware setup for an electrical system
Manage an accurate account of all managed hardware
Developed knowledge in using programming languages and version control tools
Took the initiative to learn the history of power electronics and applied to the purpose of
self-development
●​ Programmed a simple motor with single development circuit board
●​ Used problem-solving techniques to manage client needs
●​ Coordinated with multiple teams to successfully organize engineering efforts


Integrated components to mount and properly assemble with the chassis and frame
Manufactured and machined components for prototyping and final assembly
Assisted with brainstorming the design of the product
Learning manufacturing techniques
Implemented numerous internal subsystems, ensuring compatibility with software
development team requirements.
●​ Fostered future team success and teamwork using version control
●​ Collaborated with team to plan robot frame

Writing bullet points while under NDA
An NDA, or non-disclosure agreement, is an agreement that legally prevents you from discussing
specifics of your employment with others. This is done to protect company trade secrets and
proprietary information. Further, you may encounter more government-controlled information if
you work at a national laboratory or in the defence sector. Most employers will have you under an
NDA, so be sure you’ve read the fine print before you assume this doesn’t apply to you.
Play it safe. In describing your experience at a company, be very specific as to what you did
without divulging how your work was integrated into a larger proprietary project. It’s generally fine
to say you designed a 99% efficient full brick LLC resonant half-bridge converter, but be cautious
in saying it was used in an XYZ product that hasn’t been publicly announced yet.
Before you leave, it’s good practice to vet bullet points (and portfolio items if applicable) with your
manager to confirm that they don’t accidentally contain proprietary information. Doing so keeps
both of you in the green and allows you to grab feedback on your resume points while at it - a
win-win. Vet more bullet points than you intend to put on your resume, so you want to swap
them later without much consequence.

Professionalism
Ensure your bullet points are professional and concrete. Do not use the word “like” or other
useless filler words. Keep a consistent tense within a single sentence or bullet point.

Truthfulness
We recommend against attempting to deceive with your resume. It is generally trivial to spot
when an individual exaggerates the truth in a resume. Interviewers thoroughly roast those who get
interviews from exaggerated resumes.
Dishonesty is a character trait that lacks long-term efficacy. If you are considering outright
intentional dishonesty, be advised that organisations, like people, communicate with each other
frequently and tend to take notes.

Some people state what their team achieved at a company instead of their individual contribution
to the team. This violates the Writing a STAR Bullet Point convention for resumes and is easily
discernible.
Another example is outright lying about being a member of a student design team, club, or
company. Unfortunately, this is common, so this paragraph is present as a warning. When
members of said organisation discover your dishonesty, it ruins your chances of working alongside
those individuals at any organisation in the future purely because it’s hard for people to forget
being slighted.

Dunning-Kruger Effect
For those unfamiliar, the Dunning-Kruger effect is one where individuals who lack competence in
a specific field overestimate their skills, while those who are more advanced in their careers tend
to underestimate their skills. Beware of this fact when asserting knowledge in a particular domain,
as the lack of knowledge may lead one to assume their competence is far greater than it is. The
pitfalls of Dunning-Kruger are avoided by following the STAR bullet point convention with truthful
measures and refraining from asserting a specific skill level (i.e. experienced, fluent, etc) at any
point.

Imposter Syndrome
Imposter syndrome, explained well by imposter syndrome Wikipedia, is often cited as people are
writing their bullet points. Especially if this is the first time writing a resume, the process may be
the first time in your life that you’ve had to aggregate numerous positive qualities about yourself.
Remaining factual about your accomplishments is an excellent way to mitigate the impact of
imposter syndrome. Additionally, conferring with your peers and close friends regarding your
feelings is recommended.

Sections
An engineering resume needs to succinctly communicate some information to a hiring manager
to convince you to get the interview. The standard engineering resume in North America will likely
contain the following sections. Note that the order in which they are discussed below is not
necessarily the order in which they appear on a resume.

What not to include on a resume
When crafting your resume, it's essential to align its content with the objectives you've set for your
resume. For most undergraduate engineering students, this means prioritizing technical
experiences gained during university.

Non-Technical Experience
While it's common to include non-technical experiences acquired during university, assessing
their relevance to your current goals is essential. Specifically, avoid including non-technical
experience gained before the start of University. Frequently, we see many first-years put down
these experiences (i.e. ride operator, lifeguard, cashier, tutor, etc.) at the expense of more valuable
and exciting technical projects and experiences. The cases in which such experiences help a
resume compared to elaborating on other experiences are usually very slim.
The straightforward reality is that most hiring managers pass over non-relevant experiences - they
occupy precious real estate on your resume and potentially relegate your resume to the 'reject'
stack before a reviewer even reaches the pertinent experiences. Although all experiences can
contribute to your growth as an engineer and a well-rounded individual, those not directly
relevant to the position should not be included in your resume, which is primarily designed to
showcase your technical curiosity and proficiency in the engineering field.

Length
It is preferred to have a shorter resume with a larger font than to jam a resume with irrelevant
content or filler words. If you lack experience, your resume will be shorter than other resumes you
may see from those with more experience. Your ideal reader is busy, and you must assume they
will not have time to read your resume's content. Avoid wasting the reader’s time and simply
present them only with the cornerstone content - less is more.

Photos
Photos are not standard in North American engineering resumes. Pictures of yourself can also
introduce subconscious biases that recruiters are trained to pick up on; this can result in your
resume immediately being thrown out (especially in North America). For this same reason, avoid
mention of marital status, religion, and numerous other non-relevant pieces of information.
Refrain from including project photos in your resume—it can waste valuable space. Instead, we
show off photos of cool projects in a portfolio (discussed later in this guide).

Extra Blank Pages
When you export your resume, be sure there is no extra blank page at the end. Sometimes, this
happens due to poor exporting software.

Typos
Misspelled words in a resume stick out to readers. There are plenty of spell checkers, most of
which are already baked into popular text editors, so typos are easily avoidable. Another obvious
one is failing to capitalize proper nouns.

Immigration Information
If you are a citizen of a country in which the role is physically based but are not currently living or
studying in that country, then it is reasonable to state that you are a citizen there, as this may help
you. Beyond that, refrain from including your visa status or what kind of assistance you may
require.

Hobbies
There’s nothing wrong with having fun hobbies (i.e. biking, piano, dancing, etc. - we maintain as
personal advice that you shouldn’t be going through engineering school without them), but we
maintain that a resume is not the best place to display them unless relevant to the job role (for
instance, Sahil will mention his pilot licence when applying to aviation-related roles). Instead,
consider showing them off on LinkedIn (Sahil’s photos have airplanes all over them) - save your
hobbies for a fun conversation in your interview or over lunch at work!

Summary Paragraphs
Generally, we recommend against including a summary paragraph in your resume, especially if
you have less than ten years of technical experience. A resume is intended to be a summary; let it
speak for itself instead of distracting readers with an oversimplifying summary paragraph.

Key information
A resume needs to be self-contained to describe the logistics of reaching the candidate. The
context in which a fair bit of resumes will end up in the hands of hiring managers isn’t through ATS
(applicant tracking software) but instead a Slack message as a stand-alone PDF.
In North America, the standard pieces of information located close to or at the top are as follows:
●​ Name
○​ First and Last suffice
●​ Email
○​ Use a professional email address. By this, we mean don’t present
xXMinecrafterXx@gmail.com.
Optionally (but recommended), you may include the following:

●​ GitHub/Personal Website/Personal Portfolio
○​ Make sure these are polished up when on here. While it’s uncommon for an
employer to snoop through them, it is somewhat probable.
○​ In an embedded software interview, Sahil was asked about a random JavaScript
project from years ago, which led to some laughs regarding poorly named and
humorous commit messages.
●​ LinkedIn
○​ Note: LinkedIn is marked as optional since if you have a LinkedIn and they care to
find out more about you, they will usually go ahead and search for you. If you lack
space, hyperlink your name with your LinkedIn profile.

Refrain from including the following on your resume:
●​ Student ID number
●​ Term number (this is conveyed by your start/end date)
●​ Phone Number
○​ Being surprised by a call is sometimes annoying, so feel free to leave this off. Also,
be mindful of international phone charges if you’re travelling. Further, note our
section on Personally Identifiable Information for another reason to leave it off.
○​ Sahil maintains that a phone number is antiquated as a recruiting method. If
recruiters need to contact you, they’ll usually email.
○​ Daniel once thought he would receive an interview via a Zoom link and proceeded
to avoid answering a phone call, which caused a lot of confusion as he forgot they
had his phone number.

Personally Identifiable Information
Also, note that a resume can contain a lot of PII (personally identifiable information) all in one
place. Getting a resume with work locations and a phone number might be enough to break
through some security questions. Either be careful about whom you send your resume to or be
mindful of the information you include—assume it’ll end up online somewhere.
Additionally, we recommend not including your current home or mailing address on your resume
primarily for this reason. If a company requires this information, let them ask you later on in the
interview process instead of providing it in a resume. A mailing or home address often isn’t
required to initiate the interview process.

Automatic Resume Ranking
Sometimes, packing your resume with keywords will give you a leg up over other candidates
within automatic resume ranking systems. This guide covers these keywords via the skills section.
Please keep in mind that your resume still needs to be human-readable. If you apply via referrals
or cold emails, you can safely assume a human will read your resume first. On the other hand,

when applying online to simple applications at large companies with lots of applicants, there is a
reasonable chance automated systems are being employed.

Education
Include a small section detailing your post-secondary education experiences. Do not include high
school here - it simply is not relevant. Include a target end month and year for in-progress
education experiences and a date range for completed education experiences.

Notable Courses
Optionally, include notable courses taken as a part of a degree. A noteworthy course should be
directly related to your specialties, such as one that provides industry-relevant knowledge or one
that’s tailored to a specific role you’re applying for.
Refrain from putting an amalgamation of random courses in your resume - it’s implied that you
are taking courses as a part of a university. Doing so is a waste of space and can distract your
reader from the message of your resume.
Refrain from including course codes (e.g., ECE 340), as that information is useless to your target
audience, who is most likely unfamiliar with your university. Instead, refer to courses by their
course names (e.g., Embedded Microprocessor Systems), and feel free to link to course
descriptions as explained in the Links section of this guide.

Graduation Date
Note that if you are a lower-year student, you should also include your start date in University as it
is not widely known that Waterloo operates a 5-year degree program rather than the standard 4,
which can lead to some recruiters deducting a year from your experience.
You may place this section at the top of your resume when applying outside of WaterlooWorks,
but when applying through WaterlooWorks, it is recommended that you place it at the bottom.
Employers already receive a cover page that outlines the relevant information surrounding your
education, including your graduation date.
Companies may be targeting students of specific graduation years. Generally, being closer to
graduation is preferred. To give more information, we recommend including your future
graduation year in the education line instead of saying “present.” Not including a graduation date
leaves recruiters to assume.

GPA
We recommend only including your GPA on your resume if it is outstanding; otherwise, it should
be avoided to mitigate the risk of being instantly rejected, especially by automated systems.
Generally, this means having a 3.9 GPA or better. Always include your GPA on a 4.0 scale; some

universities in Canada use a different scale, but official conversion calculators exist. This is because
companies are used to US universities, which always use the 4.0 scale.

Skills Section
A skills section is an excellent way to show off what you know at a glance. It consists of a bulleted
list of categories that allows you to show off your skill sets. Here are some examples for reference
from our resumes:
Software: C, C++, Python, MISRA C, RTOS, Linux, Simulink/MATLAB, CMake, Bazel, Git, Bash
Technologies: ARM (STM32, TI, NXP), AVR, ESP-IDF, Robot Operating System (ROS)
Tools: Altium, KiCad, Oscilloscope, Logic Analyzer, PCAN/CANape, DMM
Protocols: I2C, SPI, CAN, UART, USB (2.0), Ethernet, UDP, TCP/IP, LIN, RS-232/422/485
Hardware: Analog/Digital Design, Power Electronics, PCBA Design, Design Validation
Tools: Altium, LTspice, Simplis, VHDL, ARMv7, Python, C++, C, Java, CMake, Git, CANalyzer
Lab Equipment: Oscilloscope, Function Generator, Power Supply, Eload, Spectrum Analyzer
Certifications: US Radio Amateur Extra, Canada Amateur Radio, Canada RPAS Basic
Frequently, hiring managers are looking for a particular set of skills to do the job - putting them at
the top in a single category aids in providing visibility to your skill sets while allowing you to
mention more technologies you may be familiar with. However, as you get more experienced, this
skills section will likely move to the bottom as your experience is more eye-catching. Refer back to
the job postings collected earlier on and see if any trending skill sets may be valuable for you to
mention.
Note that any item in the skills section makes it fair game for interviewers, so be sure you are
prepared to answer technical questions in an interview regarding these skills before putting them
down in this section. You should also aim to demonstrate these skills in your resume bullet
points.
Refrain from stating you have soft skills. Saying you're good at communication, coordination,
self-management, communication, or teamwork is just a misuse of the valuable space on your
resume - employers primarily evaluate soft skills in the interview.
In ece/mechatronics and adjacent engineering fields, there are a few key categories that you can
include on your resume to highlight your skills. Here are a few options to allow you to choose or
inspire yourself to make more:
●​ Software
●​ Programming Languages (C++, Javascript)
●​ Tools
●​ Lab Equipment (Oscilloscope, Vector Network Analyzer, etc..)
●​ Protocols (I2C, SPI, CAN, etc..)
●​ Technologies
●​ Certifications (Pilots License, Radio License, etc..)

When deciding the categories featured in this section, consider the amount of blank space you’re
implementing into the format of your resume. For example, if you only know one protocol, you
should not include a protocol category because you will introduce empty space into the resume
format.
We strongly recommend against putting trivial skills into such a section as it’s usually implied
and a distraction from other, more important things. If you have more advanced experience with
these tools, we would recommend citing that in a different section. Some examples of ‘trivial’
skills that we recommend you avoid including in your resume include:
●​ Microsoft Office Suite (Word, Excel, etc.)
●​ Confluence / Jira
●​ Google Office Suite (Google Drive, Google Docs, etc.)
Refrain from asserting the relative strength of your skills, as there is always someone smarter than
you willing to challenge a strong assertion. Likewise, avoid mentioning weakness in a skill, as it is
equivalent to not having it on your resume in the first place. Similarly, there is no point in citing
the length of time in which you’ve possessed or practised a skill; your resume should convey this
information accordingly.
The skills section should generally contain the keywords from the job postings identified in the
follow-along exercise at the beginning of this guide. If you possess any of those skills, then include
them in this skills section of your resume. The skills section will help you get past automated
resume readers and grabbing keywords from job applications is a great way to find new words you
may not have thought of initially.

Experiences
Experience is the second most critical part of your resume behind your name - it is the primary
method for a candidate to demonstrate their competence with proven experience. Many readers
will default to assuming this is ‘work’ experience, but other experience also counts in your lower
years. In this context, the experience can refer to design team experience, freelance experience, or
any relevant experience.
Under each experience should be bullet points describing what you did. These bullet points
should follow the STAR method discussed later on.

Job Titles
Condensing what you did in a professional role into a single job title is an interesting challenge, as
several variations on the same role are used to describe its functions. It’s important to note that
the title you put down on your resume can be different than what your offer letter claims, though
one should be truthful in exercising this on their resume. When putting down a job title, consider
the following:
●​ Industry Titles

○​ Is the work that you did in this role more similar to another role title? Consider
putting that in place of your existing title (e.g., “Firmware Engineering Intern” vs
“Software Engineering Intern”)
●​ Resume Target
○​ If you did work in this role relevant to multiple industries, but you are hoping to
selectively target one over the other, consider editing the role title and associated
bullet points for the role to better fit this new role provided you have the
experience to back it up.
○​ Example: An electrical engineering intern designs a CAD enclosure and test fixture
and is interested in pursuing a mechanical role. Titles that can be considered
include “Electromechanical Engineering Intern”, “Mechanical and Electrical
Engineering Intern”, or even “Mechanical Engineering Intern” if it was a significant
part of the internship.

Ordering & Dates
Note that while most resumes default to displaying experiences chronologically, this is not a
requirement - the most relevant experiences should be at the top. The key is you want your
resume to be cohesive and tell a story of your professional development.
Each experience should have a rough month/year to/from dates attached, optionally alongside
the physical location. This is to provide more context to readers. Dates should be written in a
consistent simple format. We recommend abbreviating months rather than writing them out
completely, for example, “Sept. 2025”.

Which Experiences
Deciding which experiences to include in a resume can be challenging. The key here is to
remember your goal with the resume, which is to land you the job of your choice. We would
advise not to include experience that you cannot directly relate to the job of your choice. Taking
this one step further, you want to show with your resume that you are interested in a particular
role. For this reason, we recommend excluding non-relevant experiences to avoid the connotation
that you are indecisive or all over the place. Instead, we recommend making multiple resumes for
each distinct specialty or type of job.

Projects
Projects are collected pieces of relevant work displayed on a resume in text form to show
potential employers that you have broader experiences than just those listed on your experience
section. These bullet points should also follow the STAR method discussed later on. Companies
typically value amateur projects just as much as professional experience as long as they are
exciting and relevant.

Portfolio
A portfolio is a collection of work you have collected to demonstrate your proficiency in the
technical areas of expertise you claim to have on your resume. While technically optional (as in,
you don’t need to have one), in our opinion, this section is a must-have for candidates seeking
technical roles if you have projects to discuss in detail, as it allows you to elaborate more about
particular designs or projects while providing links and context. It can consist of projects already
mentioned on your resume, but the key difference is that a portfolio is a different document that
typically includes pictures and more elaboration and detail. Unlike a resume, it is more freeform
and does not need to be limited to one page. Portfolios are welcomed by engineers and recruiters
alike as they demonstrate the delivery of something a candidate made and reasonable evidence
that the skill sets mentioned in the resume are backed up.
Here’s an example of a portfolio snippet from Sahil’s resume to convey the idea a little bit better.

A tip is to make a portfolio and attach it to the same file as your resume. Since a resume for
most university undergrads will be at most one page, an employer scrolling to the bottom of your
resume is met with your portfolio rather than nothing, allowing more space to put projects and
show off your skills in your chosen area.
For those using WaterlooWorks, you can submit your resume in the cover letter section and your
portfolio in the resume section to avoid having to write a custom cover letter where they are
mandatory to achieve the same effect as simply uploading your resume.

Portfolios generally improve resume effectiveness and give excellent starting points for technical
interview discussions.. Be advised that anything you put on your portfolio is fair game for technical
interview questions.

Portfolio Structure
A portfolio should be less dense than a resume while maintaining readability. Structuring a
portfolio should be done project by project. Styling of a portfolio should generally follow resume
styling to keep personal branding consistent and familiar to a reader.
The portfolio’s freeform nature means that you can choose to employ a less strict format so long
as it is clean and presentable. It is not uncommon to see portfolios developed in programs like
PowerPoint to help better display items, as a portfolio typically contains images, whereas a
resume should not. We personally use a format where each project mentioned having roughly half
a page worth of content, with half being photos/diagrams and the other half being bullet points,
but this should not be considered strict in any way and emphasis should be placed on the
inclusion of imagery and discussion surrounding technical implementation and challenges.

Portfolio Websites
Some people also choose to maintain portfolio websites, which are excellent mediums for
showing off their work since they're easily accessible online and allow for fancy animations and
video embeds. At the very least, we recommend putting your resume online at an
easy-to-remember link (TinyURL is a free way of doing this if you don't want to pay for a domain).
Our opinion on a portfolio website versus the method presented here of a PDF is somewhat
anecdotal - we couldn't find stats on whether someone is likely to scroll past the first page of a
resume or whether they were likely to click on an external link. However, we believe that having a
PDF-style portfolio attached to your resume is more effective as it requires less effort on the
reader's part to scroll down and see the rest of the document. However, we also know stories of
people interviewed because of their portfolio websites; we recommend not overthinking this
decision too much so long as there's an easily accessible portfolio within your resume.
Sahil maintains a portfolio website with Wix. Though he writes software professionally, it has a
very different flavour and completely different skill sets from full-stack web development. If pure
software development is your targeted industry, it may also be advisable to make a portfolio
website to demonstrate these skills using the skillsets advertised in your resume.

Portfolio Projects
Emphasis should be placed on technically insightful projects that measure one's competence in
the discipline you’re seeking employment. Even if a project is simple, it is worth including if it is
technically relevant.
Your most impressive projects should be placed first in a resume and portfolio. Naturally, this will
make your portfolio chronological, with the latest experiences on top. This also shows a

progression in your abilities, which employers are keen to see. Including dates in a portfolio is not
necessary but can be included. It is okay to mention projects in both a resume and portfolio and
have overlap in the details of the content. Generally, a resume’s overview of a project is succinct in
detail, whereas the portfolio discusses implementation details and challenges. It’s also worth
noting it’s likely that, unless a project is placed close to the top of a resume, it has not actually
been read.
Projects you were paid to do (i.e., at work during a past internship) can be included in a portfolio
with permission from your employer. The projects you’ve done at companies may be more
impressive and industry-relevant than the ones completed in your free time. Projects you’ve done
in your free time demonstrate that you care about the field beyond a paid role. These amateur
projects are impressive because they are generally executed without external timeline pressure,
professional guidance, and external design requirements.

Bullet Points
For each project, you can either describe the project with words in a bullet point structure or a
blurb structure. Generally, bullet points are preferred as readers can quickly jump between aspects
they care about. For example, if a project contains a firmware and mechanical aspect, a firmware
engineer reading your portfolio should be able to easily skip the less relevant mechanical bullet
points to focus on the firmware points they’re more interested in.
Bullet points should focus on the achievements and accomplishments of the project as well as the
tools and strategies used in its creation. For group projects, focus on the portions you specifically
completed and avoid being abstract or vague. These bullet points can employ the STAR bullet
point method but do not necessarily need to as it is more free-form.

Show, Don't Tell
Employing photographs, block diagrams, and links to further documentation is critical for a
portfolio section. Don’t hesitate to nerd out when describing your projects and showing off
information - if they’re in the portfolio and reading what you’re putting down, they want to hear
this. If someone is interested in one of your projects, you should ensure they can quickly get the
information they want - the words in your portfolio should be the hook to a deeper story.
Engineers reading your portfolio see right through the keyword fluff; they want to see the project
in action, how it functions, what it looks like, the design files, the Git repository, and why it was
designed in such a way.

Section Ordering
When choosing which section goes on top and which to go at the bottom, it is important to
consider your target audience and the objective of your resume. Generally, this boils down to
putting your best foot forward - whatever you think is most important should go first so people
see it. Regarding ordering experiences within a given section, see the applicable section of this
guide.

Gathering Feedback
Once you get a draft of your resume together, it’s time to review and get feedback. Review your
resume - does every line return to the initial objective you drafted? If not, it’s time to remove or
reword it.
This guide will only take you so far - it covers about 80% of what is repeated in every critique
session, but there’s still a reasonably large chunk that is unique about your resume that should be
looked over. Getting feedback from those in the positions and roles you want to be in is critical.
Reach out to upper years on LinkedIn, post on class discords, and try to find opportunities to get
your resume critiqued.
You will only receive it if you directly seek feedback. When you send your resume off as part of an
application or cold message to a prospective employer, they are unlikely to offer resume
feedback. This means it is critical to seek feedback from your peers to ensure resume quality
deliberately.

The 8-second resume heatmap technique
Ask someone (ideally, someone who does not know you or the contents of your resume) to read
over your resume and start a timer for 8-ish seconds. Tell them they only have about 8 seconds to
read your resume beforehand. At the end of the 8 seconds, pull the resume away from them and
ask what they know about your experience and what they think your objective is. If the individual
can pick up on your objective, then you’ve done it right.
This technique is effective as recruiters and hiring managers spend less time on resumes. There’s a
number floating around wherein the average screening time of a resume is roughly 6 seconds
(can’t find the exact source), which is plausible. A personal anecdote Sahil has is that when hiring
for a role with about 100 applicants, he screened the resumes in about 30 minutes or roughly 18
seconds per resume. However, he notes his decision was usually made earlier than that, and this
time also included opening each PDF and entering his decision on an applicant on a spreadsheet.
Hearing from recruiters, Daniel will note 10 seconds feels like a reasonable upper bound for a
resume, with the lowest he’s heard being just 3 seconds - the people reading your resume are
busy.
